# Wastewater_surveillance_pipeline
@Author: Arnaud N'Guessan

## Overview
This repository contains a suite of tools for analyzing the within-sample genetic diversity of SARS-CoV-2 in Wastewater (WW) samples. It is designed to work on a Compute canada server but the scripts can be run on any linux system cluster with a slurm Work manager.

## Dependencies
Linux packages: nixpkgs/16.09 gcc/7.3.0 intel/2018.3 gcc/7.3.0 blast+/2.9.0 prinseq/0.20.4 fastp/0.20.0 bwa/0.7.17 picard/2.20.6 samtools/1.10 varscan/2.4.1 python/3.6 

Python3.6 modules: "sys", "time", "multiprocessing" and "os"

R (version 3.5.2+) packages: "ggplot2", "seqinr", "grid", "RColorBrewer", "cowplot", "randomcoloR", "gplots", "lmPerm", "ggpubr", "gridExtra", "RColorBrewer", "tidyr", "dendextend", "VennDiagram", "Cairo", "UpSetR", "parallel", "foreach", "doParallel", "infotheo", "glmnet", "FD", "vegan", "ConsReg", "MASS", "leaps", "caret", "mgcv" and "session" 

## Pipeline modules
The pipeline is separated in two main modules that sould be run in the following order:
1. Variant calling module

For unning this module of the pipeline, you need to submit a job to your cluster slurm queue using the following command: 'sbatch submit_samples_to_iPMVC.sh'.
 
a) Inputs (files you need to copy into the Variant_calling workspace): 

-->2 Paired-end .fastq files for each sample (extension should be _R1.fastq and _R2.fastq). However, you can use single-end fastq but you have to modify the run_iPMVC_in_parallel.py script at lines 15-25 appropriately. The fastq files should be in the Variant_calling workspace and you need to specify the absolute path of the Variant_calling workspace in the 2 *.sh files where 'WORKSPACE' is indicated.

-->A text file with the list of samples named "lst_samples.txt".

b) Output (in the repertory WORKSPACE/Variant_calling/out/) : VarScan .tab files (tab-delimited) and common_depth_report.csv

2. Post-variant-calling analysis module

This module run various analysis of SARS-CoV-2 within host diversity (Sample coverage, lineage detection, estimation of the lineages within-sample frequency, etc).

a) Inputs (files you need to copy into the Post_variant_calling_analysis workspace):

*In the following lines, WORKSPACE refers to the absolute path of the Wastewater_surveillance_pipeline/ folder in your system.

-->A text file with the list of samples named "lst_samples.txt"

-->VarScan .tab files located at "WORKSPACE/Variant_calling/out/"

-->Fasta of the reference sequence ("MN908947_3.fasta"), which is already included but you need to replace it in case you want to use another reference genome.

-->The sample depth report file, which is located at "WORKSPACE/Variant_calling/out/common_depth_report.csv" as it is generated by the Variant calling module

-->A table named "Table_Sample_stratifications_of_interest.csv" for the data stratification analysis. An example is available at "WORKSPACE/Post_variant_calling_analysis/Table_Sample_stratifications_of_interest.csv" (TO UPDATE with new samples)

-->A table named "Metadata_samples.csv", which includes other important metadata about WW samples. An example is available at "WORKSPACE/Post_variant_calling_analysis/Metadata_samples.csv"

-->A table named "df_signature_muts_prevalence_VOCs_VUIs.csv" which indicates the signature mutations of the variants of interest (To update with the most recent data from cov-spectrum or your favourite SARS-CoV-2 lineage tracker website)

-->The tables from LSPQ named "LATEST_REPORT.csv" and "ListeCH_prefix.csv" (ask Héctor Gálvez López or someone in the covseq consortium for access). I added an older version of these files as examples in "WORKSPACE/Post_variant_calling_analysis/".

*You can execute the script in R studio but you have to manually set the argument "output_workspace", which is a variable in the script. To execute the script from the console, go to the repertory "WORKSPACE/Post_variant_calling_analysis/" and execute the following command "Rscript Wastewater_Illumina.r WORKSPACE".
